---
layout: post
title: "LittleBigPlanet Level Design Tips"
categories: 
- games
- littlebigplanet
- design
---

I recently shared my first LittleBigPlanet level (PSN: ambalek, level name: Saturn 5) and I kept notes as I was making it.  It turns out that even though it's easy to make cool stuff, it's actually quite hard to make levels that players can understand and play through successfully.

h3. Design tips

* Think of a solid theme for your level
* Do some research on your level (I was all over Wikipedia researching Saturn 5 and the Solar System for mine)
* Make a blueprint with a *pencil on paper* (it doesn't matter if you can't draw)
* *Research other levels* to see how to achieve your idea -- it's sometimes hard to create seemingly simple things without a bit of research
* Use the different *grid* sizes to quickly lay out materials for the overall structure of the level (press Start for grid options)
* *Get a feel for the camera*.  I started off creating huge scenes that weren't visible with the in-game camera (press start for camera options, you can also press down on the d-pad to stop flying)
* Undo keeps its history even if you switch to play mode, which means you can switch to play mode as much as you like
* Move the level's entrance gate to test parts deep within your level
* Think about who will play your level: I included some education tidbits about the Solar System in mine because I thought kids would like it

h3. Navigation

* *If the player backtracks they should always be able to progress again*.  It's easy to create puzzles that can trap the player if they backtrack.
* *Most MediaMolecule levels have a single path*, with extra areas for multi-player puzzles and bonuses.  It's probably worth following this scheme so people understand your levels and so they're easier to test.

h3. Design language and usability

* *Colour code objects the player can grab* (default sponge colour)
* *Colour code moving platforms that are part of a puzzle* (Mirror's Edge red object style)
* Know when to *imitate* the design language used by *MediaMolecule* so players can quickly understand your level
* *Clearly mark puzzles that require multiple players*
* *Show your working*: if you leave buttons visible it makes it easier for the community to learn from you

h3. Building and Complexity

* *Make complex shapes by connecting simple ones*: try not to cut complex shapes out of huge blocks (else you can get shape errors).
* *Try to use materials that are close to your desired colour scheme*.  Using stickers on large objects sometimes causes glitches, and stickers are less vibrant.
* *Using lots of stickers and decorations* is a good way to add interest to a scene without raising the level's complexity too much.
* Try adding stickers to similar shaped objects, and try over-sizing the sticker so it wraps around the edges of the material.  For example, adding the Earth sticker to a circle creates depth.
* *Lifts*: Anything that moves needs  to come back.  Don't take a player somewhere in a lift that doesn't return if they fall off!

h3. Lighting

* *Use lighting to create depth* and visual interest, but also to direct the player
* In a dark level you can *use lights to give hints to the player*

h3. Physics

Carefully test and adjust mechanical objects to ensure they don't move too fast or strongly.  Strong, fast moving objects can kill the player.

h3. Centrepiece Events

* Use centrepiece events to tell a story: characters that give hints and "plot" to the player are used a lot in MediaMolecule's levels
* Make sure centrepiece events don't create backtracking headaches

h3. Bonuses

Common techniques for hiding bonuses are:

* Add a bonus off the screen at the starting area in the opposite direction to which the player runs
* Exploit the third dimension to hide passages that lead to bonus rooms
* Triggered doors, panels and platforms can drop items when the player triggers them

