---
layout: post
title: "Quickly Load Rails Projects"
categories: 
- ruby
- rails
- tips
- productivity
---

Here's a huge *Rails productivity tip*.  It's a shell command that does the following:

* Changes directory to a Rails project
* Opens <code>$EDITOR</code> (set this as TextMate, MacVim, etc.)
* Opens a tab for <code>script/console</code>
* Opens a tab for logs
* Names the tabs so switching between them is easier
* Gives your Rails projects tab completion

It doesn't start <code>script/server</code> because I use "Passenger Preferences Pane":http://www.fngtps.com/passenger-preference-pane -- this is another excellent productivity-increasing Rails-oriented secret.

h3. Usage

Type <code>r projectname</code>.

h3. Installation

I've designed this to be used with "CDargs":http://www.skamphausen.de/cgi-bin/ska/CDargs -- there are macports and debian packages for it, so installation should be easy (<code>port install cdargs</code>).

CDargs makes it easy to bookmark directories.  This sounds stupid but saves loads of time, especially as CDargs adds tab completion.  Make sure you dig out <code>cdargs-bash.sh</code> from the CDargs source and add it to <code>.bashrc</code>.

Source this in <code>~/.bashrc</code> or just paste it in:

{% highlight sh %}
alias ss='./script/server'                          # script/server
alias sc='./script/console'                         # script/console
 
# Opens a new tab with the cwd
function tab {
  osascript -e "
    tell application \"System Events\" to tell process \"Terminal\" to keystroke \"t\" using command down
    tell application \"Terminal\" to do script \"cd $PWD\" in selected tab of the front window
  " > /dev/null 2>&1
}
 
function as_terminal_cmd {
  osascript -e "tell application \"Terminal\" to do script \"$1\" in selected tab of the front window" 
}
 
function terminal_title {
  if [[ $# -eq 1 && -n "$@" ]];
  then
    printf "\e]0;${@}\a";
  fi
}
 
# cd into a rails dir, start mvim and rails console
function r {
  cv $1
  as_terminal_cmd "terminal_title Log"
  as_terminal_cmd "tail -f log/development.log"
  tab
  as_terminal_cmd "terminal_title Console"
  as_terminal_cmd "sc"
  tab
  $EDITOR &
}

if [ -e "$DOTFILES/lib/cdargs-bash.sh" ]; then
  . "$DOTFILES/lib/cdargs-bash.sh"
  # Use the completion from cdargs for my "r" alias
  complete $nospace -S / -X '*/' -F _cdargs_aliases r
fi
{% endhighlight %}

I have a <code>$DOTFILES</code> shell variable for loading <code>cdargs-bash.sh</code>.  That's just where I dump my settings so moving them to other computers is quicker.  Replace this or set it with the path to <code>cdargs-bash.sh</code>.  You can remove that section if you don't want to use CDargs.

"See Gist 159680 for updates and notes":http://gist.github.com/159680

This has been designed for use with Mac OS.  If you make a version for your OS post it in the comments and I'll add links here.

